---
templateKey: blog-post
public: true
url: orchids-momentum-accelerates-with-uphold-integration
title: "Orchid’s Momentum Accelerates with Uphold Integration"
date: 1597240800000
description: "OXT, the Orchid token, is now fully integrated with Uphold, a multi-asset trading platform that allows people to buy, sell, and exchange diverse assets including fiat currency, precious metals, and crypto."
featuredpost: false
featuredimage: /img/uploads/Orchid_BlogImage_Uphold.jpg
tags:
  - Company Updates
  - Partnerships
---

OXT, the Orchid token, is now fully integrated with [Uphold](https://uphold.com/en-us/), a multi-asset trading platform that allows people to buy, sell, and exchange diverse assets including fiat currency, precious metals, and crypto. With this milestone, people can now deposit and withdraw OXT through Uphold to external wallets, as well as buy, hold and send on the platform. Uphold has integrations with 30+ digital currencies, 27 national fiat currencies including the US dollar and euro, and four major precious metals, for a total of over 1,000 trading pairs.

Dr. Steven Waterhouse, Orchid's Co-Founder and CEO said: 
> Uphold's cross-asset model advances the cause of a decentralized economy by making it seamless to trade across fiat and digital currencies as well as precious metals. The Orchid team is excited to be integrated with Uphold and we look forward to working with them to further our shared goals."

Orchid's unique VPN marketplace uses a robust system of incentives to match supply with demand and ensure ample bandwidth is available. People use OXT to fund their account, and can then purchase VPN service on a pay-as-you-go basis. Orchid also offers [in-app purchases](/orchid-launches-in-apple-app-store/) that, while still powered by OXT, allow people to buy "pre-filled" accounts the same way they would make a purchase in any other app.

Robin O'Connell, Uphold's CRO said: 
> "Internet privacy will be an important battlefield in the next decade. The VPN market is today dominated by centralized, often obscure solutions. Orchid's mission to provide access to a virtual, decentralized private network aligns with Uphold's vision to build the future of transparent financial services. The OXT integration brings full connectivity to another real-world use case to Uphold members and continues to expand the potential for mainstream adoption."

[Download the Orchid app](https://www.orchid.com/download) on iOS, MacOS, and Android to start exploring the Internet freely.