---
templateKey: blog-post
public: true
url: sheila-warren-joins-priv8s-expanding-roster-of-speakers
title: "Sheila Warren joins Priv8’s expanding roster of speakers"
date: 1613055660000
description: "We are thrilled to announce that Sheila Warren of the World Economic Forum will speak at Orchid’s Priv8 Virtual Privacy Summit."
featuredpost: false
featuredimage: /img/uploads/OrchidBlog_P8SheilaWarren.jpg
tags:
  - Privacy
  - Events
---
We are thrilled to announce that Sheila Warren of the World Economic Forum will speak at Orchid's [Priv8 Virtual Privacy Summit](https://www.orchid.com/priv8/). Priv8, a first-of-its-kind event focused on digital privacy, is a venue for experts advocates to share their experiences, predictions, hopes, and advice with like-minded people around the world. Sheila joins a growing slate of distinguished speakers, including whistleblower and cybersecurity expert Edward Snowden,  Electronic Frontier Foundation Executive Director Cindy Cohn, Digital Minister of Taiwan Audrey Tang, Executive and Director at the Linux Foundation Brian Behlendorf.

Warren is Head of Blockchain and Data Policy and a member of the Executive Committee at the World Economic Forum. She has represented banks, philanthropists and progress-focused non-profit organizations. Most recently, she served as Vice-President, Strategic Alliances and General Counsel for TechSoup, the global social enterprise that has connected civil society organizations around the world with over $9 billion in donated tech-based resources.

At Priv8, she will be joined by experts from many different spheres related to privacy. In a time when Covid-19 has pushed [so much of life](/tips-for-protecting-your-privacy-while-working-from-home/) online and governments have enacted a variety of [unprecedented emergency measures](/defending-freedom-in-the-time-of-coronavirus/), privacy has surged to the forefront of public debate. In the midst of escalating danger from governments and corporations, robust discussion and education around the topic are more important than ever.

Priv8 will take place over three days, from March 23-25. A full schedule of events, as well as additional details about Priv8, will be made public over the coming weeks. You can register [here](https://www.orchid.com/priv8) to attend.